On 24th January 2023, the offender pleaded guilty to an offence of possession of cannabis (count 2). At a later stage, on 7th June 2023, she pleaded guilty to an offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, contrary to section 47 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 (count 3). She had in fact previously indicated her willingness to plead to that offence back in January. She was then aged 26.

The assault was carried out on Miss Angela Williams. Miss Williams' former partner was Wesley Yarnold, who is the offender’s co-defendant. The offender was Yarnold's current partner.

At 8 pm on 25th December 2022 (Christmas Day), Yarnold had visited Miss Williams at her home address after having argued with the offender. He and Miss Williams had been separated for some years, but a daughter had been born as a result of that relationship. Yarnold had used his daughter's mobile phone to call the offender. The two continued their argument on the phone. Yarnold then made his way to a social club. He accidentally took his daughter's mobile phone with him. Miss Williams and her daughter went to the club in order to retrieve the phone. Yarnold gave the handset back to his daughter. Miss Williams said "Hello" to the offender who was also present. There followed a brief scuffle between the offender, who appeared to be intoxicated, and Miss Williams who returned home with her daughter shortly after.

Miss Williams then returned to the social club to confront the offender about her aggressive behaviour. There was a further confrontation between Miss Williams, the offender and Yarnold. Other customers separated them and the offender and Yarnold left the club. Miss Williams was advised to wait inside until the police arrived. Wanting to go home, Miss Williams instead left the club and began to make her way back home. En route she came across the offender and Yarnold who knocked her from her bicycle. While she was on the ground, Yarnold told the offender to "batter" her. He stamped on Miss Williams' head, and the offender repeatedly punched Miss Williams. A witness stopped her car to try to stop the attack. The witness saw the offender and Yarnold allow Miss Williams to get up before launching another attack, forcing her back to the ground. The offender kicked her barefoot to the head and tried to gouge her eyes. Yarnold put his finger in Miss Williams' mouth and pulled her top lip. The pair continued to kick and punch Miss Williams. The offender also bit Miss Williams' hand. Eventually Yarnold told the offender "enough is enough" and they left. By this time the witness had called the police who attended the scene.

Miss Williams was seen by a doctor at Warrington Hospital on Boxing Day. She had severe bruising, tenderness, grazes and scratch marks. She described suffering from blurred vision and vomiting. In her victim impact statement Miss Williams described the severe impact that the assault had had on her physically and emotionally.

The offender and Yarnold were arrested several hours later. The offender was found in possession of a small quantity of cannabis.

A pre-sentence report prepared by Miss Dentith from the Probation Service indicated that there were a number of factors which had contributed to the offender's involvement in the attack on Miss Williams which was out of character. The offender had no previous convictions or cautions. Those factors included, principally, that she had had too much to drink. She had also been emotionally impacted by the recent adoption of her two children, and she found it difficult to cope when she saw other families out enjoying themselves at Christmas. There were other factors which were also relevant to her behaviour, but principally she had drunk more than she usually would. She told the pre-sentence report that she was heavily intoxicated. The report also described how the offender had experienced a considerable number of trauma-related events in her young life. These included: an alcoholic mother; the death of her boyfriend and best friend in separate motor bike accidents when she was taking her GCSE examinations; more recently, extensive abuse from a previous partner (not Yarnold), which had led to the offender being housed in a women's refuge for her own safety; and finally, her children being taken into care, one of whom was taken into care at birth, and then being adopted.
