Deliberate spitting or coughing


Offence committed against those working in the public sector or providing a service to the public or against a person coming to the assistance of an emergency worker
This reflects the fact that people in public facing roles are more exposed to the possibility of harm and consequently more vulnerable and/or the fact that someone is working in the public interest merits the additional protection of the courts.
This applies whether the victim is a public or private employee or acting in a voluntary capacity.


Offence committed in prison (where not taken into account as a statutory aggravating factor)
Offences committed in custody are more serious because they undermine the fundamental need for control and order which is necessary for the running of prisons and maintaining safety.
Generally the sentence for the new offence will be consecutive to the sentence being served as it will have arisen out of an unrelated incident. The court must have regard to the totality of the offender’s criminality when passing the second sentence, to ensure that the total sentence to be served is just and proportionate.


Offence committed in a domestic context

History of violence or abuse towards victim by offender


Presence of Children
This reflects the psychological harm that may be caused to those who witnessed the offence.
The presence of one or more children may in some situations make the primary victim more vulnerable – for example an adult may be less able to resist the offender if concerned about the safety or welfare of children present.


Gratuitous degradation of victim
Where an offender deliberately causes additional harm to a victim over and above that which is an essential element of the offence — this will increase seriousness. Examples may include, but are not limited to, posts of images on social media designed to cause additional distress to the victim.


Abuse of power and/or position of trust
A close examination of the facts is necessary and a clear justification should be given if abuse of trust is to be found.
In order for an abuse of trust to make an offence more serious the relationship between the offender and victim(s) must be one that would give rise to the offender having a significant level of responsibility towards the victim(s) on which the victim(s) would be entitled to rely.
Abuse of trust may occur in many factual situations. Examples may include relationships such as teacher and pupil, parent and child, employer and employee, professional adviser and client, or carer (whether paid or unpaid) and dependant. It may also include ad hoc situations such as a late-night taxi driver and a lone passenger. These examples are not exhaustive and do not necessarily indicate that abuse of trust is present.
Additionally an offence may be made more serious where an offender has abused their position to facilitate and/or conceal offending.
Where an offender has been given an inappropriate level of responsibility, abuse of trust is unlikely to apply.


Any steps taken to prevent the victim reporting an incident, obtaining assistance and/or from assisting or supporting the prosecution
The more sophisticated, extensive or persistent the actions after the event, the more likely it is to increase the seriousness of the offence.


Commission of offence whilst under the influence of alcohol/drugs
The fact that an offender is voluntarily intoxicated at the time of the offence will tend to increase the seriousness of the offence provided that the intoxication has contributed to the offending.
This applies regardless of whether the offender is under the influence of legal or illegal substance(s).
In the case of a person addicted to drugs or alcohol the intoxication may be considered not to be voluntary, but the court should have regard to the extent to which the offender has sought help or engaged with any assistance which has been offered or made available in dealing with the addiction.
An offender who has voluntarily consumed drugs and/or alcohol must accept the consequences of the behaviour that results, even if it is out of character.


Offence committed whilst on licence or subject to post sentence supervision
An offender who is subject to licence or post sentence supervision is under a particular obligation to desist from further offending.
The extent to which the offender has complied with the conditions of a licence or order (including the time that has elapsed since its commencement) will be a relevant consideration.
Where the offender is dealt with separately for a breach of a licence or order regard should be had to totality.


Failure to comply with current court orders
Commission of an offence while subject to a relevant court order makes the offence more serious.
The extent to which the offender has complied with the conditions of an order (including the time that has elapsed since its commencement) will be a relevant consideration.
Where the offender is dealt with separately for a breach of an order regard should be had to totality.
